---
title: "SPARC Data curation steps"
keywords: documentation, github
sidebar: sparc_sidebar
permalink: submit_data.html
summary: This pages outlines the workflow for submitting data to the SPARC DAT-Core. 
folder: general
---

## Submitting data to the DAT-Core

{% include image.html file="sparc_workflow.png" alt="workflow" %}


### Creation of a draft dataset
**Timeline:** Creation of a draft dataset is up to the investigator 

**Who has access to the data:** The data is private and is accessible only to those that you specifically invite to access the data. Neither Blackfynn nor NIH can access the data unless you invite them.

**Who owns the data:** The investigator that submitted the data or the person who is assigned as the owner of the dataset.

**Process:** At any time, users can create a draft dataset within the SPARC Consortium organization in preparation for submitting the data under embargo. 

At this time, the data is private to the data owner. At any point in time, users can grant teams, or individual users to access to the draft dataset. The dataset owner can, at any point in time, leverage the platform functionality to access the data programmatically, or use the viewers to view and manipulate the data. As part of the SPARC Consortium organization, the data models and records are restricted to only the data standards that are developed by the Data Standards Committee.

**Required steps for the data owner:**
- Creating and naming a dataset (see: Creating datasets )
- Providing a short description for the dataset
- Uploading files and organizing the dataset according to the requirements of the Data Curation Team.

### Sharing draft dataset with the Data Curation Team
**Timeline:** Sharing the data with the Data Curation Team should take place within 1 month of completing a project milestone (according to the SPARC Material Sharing Policy)

**Who has access to the data:** The data is private and is accessible only to those that you specifically invite to access the data. At this stage this will include the Data Curation Team.

**Who owns the data:** The investigator that submitted the data or the person who is assigned as the owner of the dataset.

**Process:** The Data Curation Team will work with the investigators to curate the dataset. This includes capturing the metadata, mapping it to the standardized models developed by the SPARC Data Standards Committee, and integrating it into the SPARC Integrated Dataset.

**Required steps for the data owner:**
- Share the dataset with the SPARC Data Curation team on the DAT-Core platform
- Work with the curation team to curate the data


### Initial submission and publishing as embargoed dataset
**Timeline:** As soon as the curation process has been completed, the investigator is expected to share the data under embargo.

**Who has access to the data:** The data is now shared with all members of the SPARC Embargoed Data team. A segment of the metadata (as defined by the SPARC Data Sharing Committee) will be available to the public at this time.

**Who owns the data:** The investigator that submitted the data or the person who is assigned as the owner of the dataset.

**Process:** The dataset is now considered to be an embargoed dataset. This will provide “read-only” access to all members of the SPARC Consortium organization. The investigator is still the data owner and can restrict who has ‘edit’ permissions on the dataset. There are discussions within the data sharing committee about a workflow to allow the public to see basic information (metadata) about the dataset.

**Required steps for the data owner:**
- The owner will need to change the ‘sharing’ setting to include the **SPARC Embargoed Data Sharing Group** with read-only priviledges.


### Publishing submitted dataset into public domain 
**Timeline:** Eleven months after sharing the draft dataset with the Data Curation team, or at the time of online publication of a paper using the dataset, whichever comes first.

**Who has access to the data:** The dataset is now publicly available. There will be processes that require people outside the SPARC Consortium to request access to the data from the data owner.

**Who owns the data:** The investigator that submitted the data or the person who is assigned as the owner of the dataset.

**Process:** When datasets are shared publicly, the data will receive a digital object identifier (DOI), which can be used to reference the data in publications.

**Required steps for the data owner:**
- Publish the dataset to the Open Data Library to make the dataset findable and accessible by anybody. The Open Data Library is a public facing web application to make available and distribute public datasets on the Blackfynn platform. It is slated for development in 2019. 


##  Schematic representation of SPARC Data on the DAT-Core

The figure below is a schematic representation of the workflow described above. It highlights how data is generated by individual investigators, is curated by the curation team, and shared as an embargoed dataset with the **SPARC Embargoed Data Sharing Group** . It shows how the data is made available to the public over time, and how the Integrated Dataset intersects with the individual datasets created by the investigators.

{% include image.html file="dat_core_diagram.png" alt="workflow" %}
